CSE 314: Operating System Sessional

Description
Assignment declared

January 2026

Change Log
Updated By
NTD

Last compiled on August 7, 2026 at
1

Timestamp
7 August, 2026, 11:55 PM

23:46 GMT+6

January 2026 CSE 314: Operating System Sessional
Assignment 3: IPC
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology
August 2026

1

Scenario: The Shadows of Small Heath

The year is 1920, and Birmingham’s industrial landscape presents a backdrop of constant activity
and underlying tension. In the working-class district of Small Heath, where factory smoke mingles
with the everyday bustle of urban life, the Peaky Blinders have established an extensive intelligence
operation. The narrow cobblestone streets echo with the sounds of horse-drawn carts and the steady
rhythm of industrial machinery, while the perpetual haze from coal-burning factories creates an
atmosphere of both productivity and concealment.
Tommy Shelby has designed a sophisticated document distribution system that requires the coordination of N operatives, each assigned a numerical identifier from 1 to N. The operation depends
on precise synchronization among these operatives, who work in predetermined groups to ensure
operational security. The consequences of failure extend beyond mere disappointment—discovery
could result in serious legal repercussions or violent retaliation from competing criminal organizations seeking to establish their own dominance in Birmingham’s underworld.
The organizational structure divides operatives into units of exactly M members each (where
N = cM, with c representing a positive integer). Group formation follows a systematic approach:
when M equals 3, operatives 1, 2, and 3 constitute the first unit or group, operatives 4, 5, and
6 form the second unit, and this pattern continues throughout the operation. Each unit must
successfully complete a two-phase process to accomplish their mission of distributing intelligence
documents throughout Birmingham’s extensive underground network.
The operation progresses through two distinct phases, each presenting unique challenges and
requiring careful coordination. Within each unit, the operative holding the highest identification
number assumes leadership responsibilities, bearing ultimate accountability for the group’s success
and the safety of fellow members.
Document Recreation Phase: Each operative independently visits one of several clandestine printing facilities strategically located throughout Birmingham’s industrial quarter. Using
specialized typewriting equipment, they carefully recreate their assigned portion of the intelligence
document. Upon completion, they deliver their work to their designated group leader, maintaining
the security principle that no individual operative possesses complete information.
Logbook Entry Phase: Following successful collection of all document portions from their
unit members, group leaders proceed to the central intelligence hub. This facility, housed within an
unremarkable building that serves as the operational nerve center, maintains the master logbook.
Leaders must record their completed operation in this heavily secured document, which tracks all
intelligence activities across the Birmingham network.

2

CSE 314: Operating System Sessional

2

January 2026

Operational Challenges and Synchronization

The execution of this operation faces several practical constraints that require careful management
and coordination among all participants.
Challenge #1: The operation has access to only four typewriting stations (TS1, TS2, TS3,
TS4) distributed across Birmingham’s industrial quarter. These stations are concealed within legitimate business establishments to avoid detection. Station assignment follows a specific protocol:
operatives are assigned to stations based on the formula (operative ID mod 4 + 1). For example,
operative 4 uses TS1, operative 1 uses TS2, and so forth. Operatives do not arrive simultaneously
due to various factors including surveillance patterns, patrol schedules, and other operational considerations. When an operative arrives at an occupied station, they must wait, which increases
exposure risk with each passing moment.
Challenge #2: The central intelligence hub maintains a single master logbook that serves
as the authoritative record of all operations. Only one group leader may make entries at any
given time, as simultaneous writing would create inconsistencies that could compromise the entire
operation’s security. However, multiple personnel may review existing entries while no writing is
taking place, allowing for continuous information flow essential to ongoing operations.

3

Operational Tasks

3.1

Task #1: Station Assignment Protocol

When an operative arrives at their assigned typewriting station and finds it occupied, they must
wait in a nearby concealed location. Upon completing their typewriting work, operatives follow a
communication protocol to signal station availability. The departing operative alerts all operatives
who may be waiting at the concealed location for that specific station, ensuring efficient resource
utilization and minimal exposure time.
Your objective is to implement this coordination system, ensuring that no operative experiences
indefinite waiting while maintaining operational security through proper synchronization mechanisms.

3.2

Task #2: Intelligence Hub Access Control

After group leaders collect document portions from every member of their unit, they proceed to
the central intelligence hub to record their operation in the master logbook. They may only make
entries when no other personnel are reading or writing in the logbook. Two intelligence staff
members monitor the logbook continuously: one provides periodic operational progress reports to
Thomas Shelby, while another maintains status updates on information boards. This scenario must
be implemented using reader-writer problem principles, where writers must wait until all readers
complete their current activities.

4

Implementation Requirements
• No Busy Waiting: Continuous availability checking (busy waiting) is prohibited throughout
the implementation.
• Randomized Arrival: Generate all operatives simultaneously but introduce random delays
before they begin the document recreation phase to simulate realistic operational conditions
and varying arrival times.
Last compiled on August 7, 2026 at
3

23:46 GMT+6

CSE 314: Operating System Sessional

January 2026

• Poisson Distribution: Use Poisson distribution to generate random timing values. Select
an appropriate inter-arrival rate that reflects realistic operational constraints.
• Timing Implementation: Implement operation timing using sleep functions. The relative
time requirements for each operation are specified in the provided table.
• Logbook Management: The master logbook tracks the total number of completed operations using a shared variable (initially set to 0). Implement different random intervals for the
two intelligence staff members who read the logbook. For example, Staff 1 might read at time
1, Staff 2 begins reading at time 3 while Staff 1 continues reading, then Staff 1 reads again
at time 8. Readers should remain active in the system from initialization, using appropriate
randomness to demonstrate concurrent access patterns.
• Detailed Logging: Print comprehensive information about each operative’s actions, including precise timing information. Sample output formats are provided to demonstrate expected
formatting standards.
Operation
Document Recreation
Logbook Entry

Relative Time Unit
x
y

• You must use pthreads and semaphores for solving this problem and the implementation
language must be C++. Otherwise, you will not receive any marks.

4.1

Input/Output Specifications

• You will take input from a file and give output in an output file
• Input file format:
N M
x y

Where N = Number of operatives, M = Unit size, x, y = relative time units

5

Sample Execution

Input:
15 5
10 3
Example Output (Timings may not be same):
Operative 4 has arrived at typewriting station at time 4
Operative 2 has arrived at typewriting station at time 5
Operative 1 has arrived at typewriting station at time 7
Operative 3 has arrived at typewriting station at time 8
Operative 6 has arrived at typewriting station at time 10
Operative 7 has arrived at typewriting station at time 10
Last compiled on August 7, 2026 at
4

23:46 GMT+6

CSE 314: Operating System Sessional

January 2026

Operative 5 has arrived at typewriting station at time 12
Operative 8 has arrived at typewriting station at time 14
...
Intelligence Staff 1 began reviewing logbook at time 13. Operations completed = 0
Operative 4 has completed document recreation at time 14
Intelligence Staff 2 began reviewing logbook at time 17. Operations completed = 0
...
Unit 1 has completed document recreation phase at time 60
...
Intelligence Staff 2 began reviewing logbook at time 78. Operations completed = 0
Intelligence Staff 1 began reviewing logbook at time 82. Operations completed = 0
...
Unit 2 has completed intelligence distribution at time 95
Intelligence Staff 2 began reviewing logbook at time 98. Operations completed = 1
The timestamps and sequence demonstrate the coordination required for successful operation
execution within the related setting.

6

Evaluation Criteria
Task
Task 1

Task 2

Documentation

7

Subtask
Randomized operative arrival at
stations
Station availability detection without
busy waiting
Proper notification of all waiting
operatives
Implementation of reader-writer
problem with readers having higher
priority
Printing moves of operatives/groups
Timing information integration
Random delays using sleep to simulate
realistic scenarios

Marks
15
