Bangladesh University of Engineering & Technology (BUET)
Department of Computer Science & Engineering (CSE)
CSE 310 (Compiler Sessional), January 2026 Term

Assignment 4
Intermediate Code Generation (ICG)
1

Introduction

In the previous assignment, we have performed syntax and semantic analysis of a
source code written in a subset of C language. In this assignment you have to
generate intermediate code for a source program having no error. That means if
your source code does not contain any error, which was to be detected in the
previous offline, you will have to generate intermediate code for the source code.
We have picked 32-bit x86 Linux assembly for FASM (https://flatassembler.net/)
as our intermediate representation.

2 Tasks
You have to complete the following tasks in this assignment.

2.1 Intermediate Code Generation
You have to generate a 32-bit x86 Linux assembly for FASM program for an input
program based on a given grammar. Your program must satisfy the following
requirements.
● Use the same grammar that you used in assignment 3 on syntax and semantic
analysis.

Page 1 of 5

● You have to generate the desired assembly code by traversing the parse tree
using visitor pattern in the way you have implemented Assignment 3. No
embedded actions in the grammar file is allowed.
● The generated assembly files must successfully be assembled by FASM.
● You must generate the code on the fly and write to some file. You are allowed
to use at most one temporary file to store and process the generated code.
● Use short-circuit or jumping code while generating code for boolean
expressions.
● All the local variables of a function must be stored and accessed through the
stack. You are not allowed to declare any variable in the data segment to
represent a local variable.
● All the parameters to a function must be passed through the stack. However,
for the return value you are allowed to use a register. As such your program
should be able to support recursive functions.
● Annotation of the generated assembly code by putting the line no from the
source file as comments to show the mapping of a block of assembly code
to its corresponding C code.
● Write a procedure for println(ID) function and call this procedure in
your assembly code whenever you reduce a rule containing println.
● You are not required to handle any floating point operations in the source file.

2.2 Optimization
You have to do some peephole optimizations after intermediate code is generated.
See Section 8.7 of your textbook for examples of peephole optimizations. Some
examples are given below.
(i) Removing redundant MOV instruction from consecutive instructions as
shown below.
MOV AX, a
MOV a, AX ← redundant; can be removed
Page 2 of 5

(ii) Removing redundant consecutive push and pop of the same register/address.
PUSH AX
POP AX
(iii) Removing redundant operations such as ADD AX, 0
MUL AX, 1
(iv) Removing redundant labels such L3:
L4:
L5: ← Any two of the three labels can be removed

3

Input

The input will be a C source program in .c extension. File name will be given
from the command line.

4 Output
The output of this assignment are primarily two files, namely code.asm and
optimized_code.asm. The file code.asm will contain the generated assembly code
before performing optimization. The other file optimized_code.asm will contain
the assembly code after optimization. The generated assembly files
must run successfully be assembled by FASM to produce to Linux executable.

Page 3 of 5

5

Some Guidelines
● Instead of writing the full code in one shot, build your code incrementally for
different constructs of the language. You may follow the below order.
○ Data: constants → non-array variables → array variables
○ Expressions: add operations → multiplication operations → unary
operations → relational operations → logical operations
○ Statements: assignments → if → if-else → loops
○ Functions: no arg no return value → no args but with return value →
having both args and return value

5

Submission
● Plagiarism is strongly prohibited. In case of plagiarism -100% marks will
be given.
● No submission after the deadline will be allowed.

6

Submission

Since this is a large project, submissions will be taken in two phases. In the first
phase submission, you have to implement a subset of the grammar rules primarily
involving variable declarations, expression handling and printing. The remaining
rules are to be implemented in the second phase submission. See the file
P1_Grammar.pdf to find the list of rules to be implemented in phase 1.
All submissions will be taken via the departmental Moodle site. Please follow the
steps given below to submit your assignment.
i.

In your local machine, create a new folder and name it with your 7-digit
student id.

ii.

Put all the required files including a script to compile and run your code. In
case, your program cannot produce assembly codes that FASM can assemble
Page 4 of 5

for all the supplied sample input files, provide your custom input files for
which it works.
iii.

Compress the folder in a zip file which should be named as your 7-digit
student id followed by phase prefix with an underscore in between such as
2205001_P1.zip and 2205001_P2.zip for phase 1 and phase 2 submissions,
respectively.

iv.

Submit the zip file within the Deadline.

7

Deadline

Submission deadline:
Phase 1 Submission: Friday August 28, 2026, 11:00 PM.
Phase 2 Submission: Friday September 11, 2026, 11:00 PM.

Page 5 of 5

